Imaging software episode (#21)
HealthBioscienceIDEAS/microscopy-novice: episodes/imaging-software.md

#### Plugins

Plugins, in contrast to scripts, are focused on adding optional new features to a piece of software (rather than automating use of existing features). They allow members of the community, outside the main team that develops the software, to add features they need for a particular image type or processing task. They're designed to be re-useable so other members of the community can easily benefit from these new features.

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

A good place to look for advice on software is the [image.sc forum](https://forum.image.sc/) - a popular forum for image analysis (mostly related to biological or medical images).

## Open source vs proprietary

A key factor to consider when choosing software is whether it is open source or proprietary:

- **Open source**: Software that is made freely available to use and modify.

- **Proprietary**: Software that is owned by a company and usually requires either a one-off fee or subscription to use.

> Both can be extremely useful, and it is very likely that you will use a mix of both to view and analyse your images. For example, proprietary software is often provided by the manufacturer when you purchase a light microscope. You will likely use this during acquisition of your images and for some processing steps after. This being said, we encourage using open-source software wherever possible, as it is free to use and easy to extend with extra features.

Reviewer: It is possible that someone would get a capital equipment grant for purchasing a new piece of equipment like a fancy microscope from time to time, especially if starting out a new lab. Perhaps "proprietary software is often provided by the manufacturer when a microscope is purchased" or "proprietary software is often provided initially by the manufacturer with the purchase of a light microscope"

Napari's user interface is split into a few main sections, as you can see in the diagram below:

![](fig/ui-sections-napari.png){alt="A screenshot of Napari with the main user interface sections labelled"}

Let's take a brief look at each of these sections - for full information see the [Napari documentation](https://napari.org/stable/tutorials/fundamentals/viewer.html).

## Main menu

We already used the main menu in the last section to open a sample image. The main menu contains various commands for opening images, changing preferences and installing plugins (we'll see more of these options in later episodes).

## Canvas

The canvas is the main part of the Napari user interface. This is where we display and interact with our images. 

Try moving around the cells image with the following commands:
```
Pan - Click and drag
Zoom - Scroll in/out
```

## Dimension sliders

Dimension sliders appear at the bottom of the canvas depending on the type of image displayed. For example, if we drag the slider at the bottom of the cells image, we move up and down in this 3D image stack.

![](fig/dim-slider.png){alt="Three screenshots of the cells image in napari, at different z depths"}

> Pressing the arrow buttons at either end of the slider steps through one image at a time. Also, pressing the 'play' button at the very left of the slider moves automatically through the stack until pressed again.

Reviewer: If we are talking about 3D images where z is the third dimension, then I think slice is best. If this were a 2D timeseries, then I would prefer frame

We will see in later episodes that more sliders can appear if our image has more dimensions (e.g. time series, or further channels).

## Viewer buttons

The viewer buttons control various aspects of the Napari viewer:

> ### Console ![](fig/console-button.png){alt="A screenshot of Napari's console button"}

Author: Thanks @dpshelio ! I've linked to all napari's icons directly now

### Points ![](fig/points-button.png){alt="A screenshot of Napari's point layer button"}

This button creates a new [points layer](https://napari.org/stable/howtos/layers/points.html). This can be used to mark specific locations in an image.

### Shapes ![](fig/shapes-button.png){alt="A screenshot of Napari's shape layer button"} 

This button creates a new [shapes layer](https://napari.org/stable/howtos/layers/shapes.html). Shapes can be used to mark regions of interest e.g. with rectangles, ellipses or lines.

### Labels ![](fig/labels-button.png){alt="A screenshot of Napari's labels layer button"}

This button creates a new [labels layer](https://napari.org/stable/howtos/layers/labels.html). This is usually used to label specific regions in an image e.g. to label individual nuclei.

### Remove layer ![](fig/delete-button.png){alt="A screenshot of Napari's delete layer button"}  

This button removes the currently selected layer (highlighted in blue) from the layer list.

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: challenge 

## Point layers

> Let's take a quick look at one of these new layer types - the ```Points``` layer.

Author: All single words/individual lines are changed to use single backticks now

---
title: 'Imaging Software'
teaching: 
exercises: 
---

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: questions 

- What are the different software options for viewing microscopy images?
- How can Napari be used to view images?

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: objectives

- Explain the pros and cons of different image visualisation tools (e.g. ImageJ, 
Napari and proprietary options)
- Use Napari to open images
- Navigate the Napari viewer (pan/zoom/swapping between 2D and 3D views…)
- Explain the main parts of the Napari user interface

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

## Choosing the right tool for the job

> Light microscopes can produce a very wide range of image data - for example:

Author: I think it's good to restrict to only light microscopes - as for example, electron microscopy / X-ray microscopy / atomic force microscopy etc... can have quite different approaches. I'm thinking especially of the day 2 material where we're talking more about how to setup an experiment + what factors to consider. I think confocal falls under 'light microscopes' - do you agree @drmatthews ?

> Light microscopes can produce a very wide range of image data - for example:

Reviewer: I'm happy with this focusing on light microscope. Maybe we could give some examples of popular submodalities that we think this will cover, so 
"Light microscopes (including confocal, flourescent, ...)"

- 2D or 3D
- Time series or snapshots
- Different channels

> - Small to large datasets

Author: > Why does this render in larger text than some of the bullet points below?

For me these render the same size - so maybe it's a mac specific issue? We can check this on the web pages once this is merged too.

**Specific plugins**   
There are excellent plugins available for Fiji/ImageJ and Napari that focus on 
specific types of image data or processing steps. The availability of a specific 
plugin will often be a deciding factor on whether to use Fiji/ImageJ or Napari 
for your project.

**Ease of installation and user interface**  
As Fiji/ImageJ has been in development for longer, it tends to be simpler to 
install than Napari (especially for those with no prior Python experience). In 
addition, as it has more built-in image processing tools, it tends to be simpler 
to use fully from its user interface. Napari meanwhile is often strongest when 
you combine it with some Python scripting (although this isn't required for many 
workflows!)

::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

For this lesson, we will use Napari as our software of choice. It's worth 
bearing in mind though that Fiji/ImageJ can be a useful alternative - and many 
workflows will actually use both Fiji/ImageJ and Napari together! Again, it's 
about choosing the right tool for your data and research question.

## Opening Napari

Let's get started by opening a new Napari window - you should have already 

> followed the [installation instructions](../learners/setup.md). Note this can 

Author: Yes - for the moment I'd use option 1. I'll update the setup instructions with any additional steps once we've decided the content of the rest of the episodes e.g. we may want to install certain napari plugins upfront too.

```
Go to the top menu-bar of Napari and select:
File > Open Sample > napari builtins > Cells (3D+2Ch)
```

You should see a fluorescence microscopy image of some cells:

![](fig/cells-napari.png){alt="A screenshot of a flourescence microscopy image 
of some cells in Napari"}

## Napari's User interface

Napari's user interface is split into a few main sections, as you can see in the 
diagram below:

![](fig/ui-sections-napari.png){alt="A screenshot of Napari with the main user 
interface sections labelled"}

Let's take a brief look at each of these sections - for full information see the 
[Napari documentation](https://napari.org/stable/tutorials/fundamentals/viewer.html).

## Main menu

We already used the main menu in the last section to open a sample image. The 
main menu contains various commands for opening images, changing preferences and 
installing plugins (we'll see more of these options in later episodes).

## Canvas

The canvas is the main part of the Napari user interface. This is where we 
display and interact with our images. 

Try moving around the cells image with the following commands:
```
Pan - Click and drag

> Zoom - Scroll in/out

Reviewer: What is meant by scroll here? Should we say "Use the same gestures with your mouse that you would use to scroll up and down in a document, this should zoom in and out of the image"

```

## Dimension sliders

> Dimension sliders appear at the bottom of the canvas depending on the type of 
> image displayed. For example, if we drag the slider at the bottom of the cells 
> image, we move up and down in this 3D image stack.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Dimension sliders appear at the bottom of the canvas depending on the type of 
image displayed. Here we have a 3D image, which consists of a stack of 2D images. If we drag the slider at the bottom of the cells image, we move up and down in this stack of 2D images.
```
Since we have not yet talked about 2D and 3D, I thought it would be important to give a little more context here.

![](fig/dim-slider.png){alt="Three screenshots of the cells image in napari, at 

> different z depths"}

Reviewer: Worth annotating the image to highlight the play button and the sliders?

Pressing the arrow buttons at either end of the slider steps through one image 
at a time. Also, pressing the 'play' button at the very left of the slider moves 
automatically through the stack until pressed again.

We will see in later episodes that more sliders can appear if our image has more 
dimensions (e.g. time series, or further channels).

## Viewer buttons

> The viewer buttons control various aspects of the Napari viewer:

Reviewer: I think it would help to crop out the viewer buttons from a previous image and annoate each of them so that people remember what you are talking about.

Author: I'll add a note that these are the buttons at the bottom left of Napari. As we now link to the icon svgs directly from the Napari repo, I think it's best to avoid also labelling them on a screenshot too ( so the image + icons don't get out of sync if the icons change )

Pan - Shift + click and drag
Zoom - Scroll in/out
```

### Roll dimensions ![](
https://raw.githubusercontent.com/napari/napari/main/napari/resources/icons/roll.svg
){alt="A screenshot of Napari's roll dimensions button" height='25px'} 

This switches the order of dimensions in the viewer. For example, let's switch 
back to the 2D view for our cells image and press the roll dimensions button 
multiple times. You'll see that it switches between different orthogonal views 
(i.e. at 90 degrees to our starting view). Pressing it 3 times will bring us 
back to the original orientation.

![](fig/roll-dims.png){alt="Three screenshots of the cells image in napari, 
with different dimension order"}

### Transpose dimensions ![](
https://raw.githubusercontent.com/napari/napari/main/napari/resources/icons/transpose.svg
){alt="A screenshot of Napari's transpose dimensions button" height='25px'}

This button swaps the two currently displayed dimensions. Again trying this for 
our cells image, we see that the image becomes flipped. Pressing the button 
again brings us back to the original orientation.

![](fig/transpose-dim.png){alt="Two screenshots of the cells image in napari, 

> with dimensions swapped"}

Reviewer: I wonder if this could be further illustrated by having a red axes and a blue axes in the first image and then transposing them on the second image, just to enforce what transposing does here.

Author: I'll use Napari's View > Axes > Axes Visible to do this. It adds a pink / blue arrow to the viewer for each axis.

### Grid ![](
https://raw.githubusercontent.com/napari/napari/main/napari/resources/icons/grid.svg
){alt="A screenshot of Napari's grid button" height='25px'}

> This button displays all images in a grid. Using this for our cells image, we 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This button displays all layers from the images in a grid. Using this for our cells image, we 
```

This button brings the canvas back to its default view. This is useful if you 
have panned/zoomed to a specific region and want to quickly get back to an 
overview of the full image.

## Layer list

Now that we've seen the main controls for the viewer, let's look at the layer 
list. 'Layers' are how Napari displays multiple items together in the viewer. 
For example, currently our layer list contains two items - 'nuclei' and 
'membrane'. These are both `Image` layers and are displayed in order, with 
the nuclei on top and membrane underneath.

![](fig/layer-list.png){alt="A screenshot of Napari's layer list, showing two 
image layers named 'nuclei' and 'membrane'"}

We can show/hide each layer by clicking the eye icon on the left side of their 
row. We can also rename them by double clicking on the row.

We can change the order of layers by dragging and dropping items in the layer 
list. For example, try dragging the membrane layer above the nuclei. You should 
see the nuclei disappear from the viewer (as they are now hidden by the membrane 
image on top).

![](fig/layer-reordering.png){alt="A screenshot of Napari with the nuclei and 

> membrane layer swapped"}

Reviewer: This raises an interesting point. The "black" in the membrane is opaque and thus blocking out the nuclei, while the black in the nuclei appear to be transparent to let the layer below through. This appears to be controlled by the blending feature. If I were to swap the layers and the blending, I get what appears to be the same image as before. Probably not for this lesson, but something we might want to make clear in a future one.

Here we only have `Image` layers, but there are many more types like `Points`, 
`Shapes` and `Labels`, some of which we will see later in the episode.

> ## Layer controls

Reviewer: I also have a gamma slider in my layer controls. Not saying we need to mention it, but people in the class may ask what it does. I assume it has some control over the ramp function of the colormap.
